How do I approach Bandhan Bank to open an Account?
You can apply for Bandhan Bank Account through any  of the below channels.
Please call on +91 33 6633 3333 OR 1800 258 8181  (Toll Free)
Place request through our website
Please contact&nbsp;  your nearest Bandhan Bank Branch.

What are the different channels through which I can access my Bandhan Bank Account?
You can access your Account through:
Bandhan Bank branches
Bandhan Bank ATMs
Net Banking
Phone Banking
Mobile Banking


How to update the new address in my Bandhan Bank Account?
You can update your address through any of the following options
Visit any Bandhan Bank branch and submit an application along with the address proof
Send across a duly- filled &amp; signed application along with address proof to the branch where you opened your account with an authorization letter.

How to update PAN number?
We request you to follow either of the following procedure mentioned below to update you PAN number:
Step 1) Submit a written request specifying your updated PAN number in any nearest Branch
Step 2) Give a self-attested photocopy of your PAN card. (Please carry originals for verification)

How to update mobile number and email address?
Please visit your nearest Bandhan Bank branch and follow the below mentioned steps
Step 1) Get an application form from the branch or download a form from the website
Step 2) Fill the application form duly signed by all the holders and submit it to your nearest branch.

Do I have any facility for Standing Instructions?
Yes, you can set up standing instructions through your Bandhan Bank Account.

Re-issuance of ATM/Debit Card PIN?
Please download Application Form or collect the same from the nearest Bandhan Bank Branch
The Application Form should be duly filled and signed by the Account Holder/s.
Submit the duly filled Application Form at your nearest Branch
On receipt of Form and successful verification, the new ATM/Debit Card PIN will be sent to your mailing address

What happens if I don't use my account for a very long time?
The account becomes dormant if there are no customer initiated transactions (excludes system generated transactions like credit interest, debit interest etc), in the account for a continuous period of two years. If the account status is 'Dormant', transactions through Direct Banking Channels like ATM, Net-Banking, Phone 	Banking are not be allowed by the Bank. Please contact your nearest Bandhan Bank Branch for activating your account
Please visit your nearest Bandhan Bank Branch for further details and information


Can any individual borrow funds from Bank under Microbanking?
Microbanking loans are extended to individual in the group formed by them. The group members shall satisfy the underwriting criteria prescribed by the Bank for being eligible for the loan.

Can we open Savings Bank (SB) account with the Bank
Yes. The loan shall also be disbursed through the Savings Bank account

Do we need to come to Bank branch for availing disbursements.
The loans shall be credited to your SB account. You can withdraw the amount at your convenience at your doorstep. Further, You can also visit the nearby Doorstep Service Center of the Bank to draw cash from your SB account.

Can we open only SB account in case we don’t want to borrow
Yes, you can open only SB account.

Can I borrow Srishti loan in case my Suchana loan is still outstanding
No. A borrower can have any one of Suchana or Srishti outstanding at any given point in time.

Do I have any facility for Standing Instructions?
Yes, you can set up standing instructions through your Bandhan Bank Account.